
(lecture_1)=
# The Evolution of Stars

Professor: **[Christopher Tout](mailto:cat@ast.ac.uk)** ([IoA](https://ast.cam.ac.uk))

---

```{highlights}

**Learning objectives:**
- The basic physics of stars illustrated by the structure equations.
- The factors driving stellar evolution: nuclear burning and mixing, convection.
- The respective evolutionary trajectories of low-, intermediate- and high-mass stars.
- Outcomes of stellar death: supernovae, white dwarfs, neutron stars and black holes.

```


Stars appear to be of different brightness and colour.  Knowing their
distance we can place them in a Hertzsprung--Russell diagram that
plots luminosity as a function of surface effective temperature.
Stars then fall into distinct groups and evolve from one to another.
We shall examine the physics that determines the structure of stars
and thence their position in this diagram.  There are two structure
equations that describe conservation of mass and hydrostatic
equilibrium.  These are linked by and equation of state that relates
pressure to temperature density and composition.  To close the system
two more equations are required for heat transport and energy
generation.  These equations determine the structure of a star.
Stellar evolution is driven primarily by nuclear burning that changes the
composition over time.  Towards the end of a stars life mass loss in
stellar winds become increasingly important.  We shall discuss the
evolution of a typical $5\,M_\odot$ star.






## The Hertzsprung--Russell Diagram






```{figure} ../l2/figures/stars.jpg
---
height: 500px
name: fig:stars
---
Stars vary in brightness and colour
```


%Figure stars.jpg





Knowing the distance to a star we can measure its absolute luminosity $L$.
Stars are almost black bodies so define an effective temperature
$T_{\rm eff}$ such that

$L = 4\pi\sigma R^2T_{\rm eff}^4.$


Effective temperature can be determined from colour 


```{figure} ../l2/figures/hrscheme.pdf
---
height: 500px
name: fig:stars
---
A Hertzsprung--Russell Diagram showing various groups of
stars that show up as distinct groups.
```

%Figure hrscheme.eps
%Figure 2: A Hertzsprung--Russell Diagram showing various groups of
stars that show up as distinct groups.



Now

$\log L = 2\log R + 4\log T_{\rm eff} + \rm const$


so loci of constant radius are straight lines in the H--R diagram with
radius increasing towards the top right.

### Stellar Types

**Main Sequence** -- the most populated region on which the Sun lies


**Red Giants** -- a well populated area of large red stars

**White Dwarfs** -- Faint small stars
               
**AGB Stars** -- asymptotic giant branch stars, a more luminous sequence
slightly offset from the red giants
               
**subgiants** -- a sparsely populated group between the main sequence and
giant branch
               
**Super Giants** -- bright large stars spanning blue to red found in young
star clusters
               
**Red Clump** -- an increased population at the base of the AGB
               
**Horizontal Branch** -- a similarly luminous set of stars extending
bluewards from the red clump
      
Through steallr modelling we now have a good qualitative understanding
of how stars evolve in an H--R diagram.
     
## Structure Equations


```{figure} ../l2/figures/structure.pdf
---
height: 500px
name: fig:structure
---
Structure Eqautions.
```

%Figure 3: Structure Eqautions.
      
Conservation of mass

${{\rm d}m\over{\rm d}r} = 4\pi r^2\rho$

and hydrostatic equilibrium

${{\rm d}P\over{\rm d}r} = -\rho g = -{Gm\rho\over r^2}.$

      
## Equation of state
               
To relate pressure and density we must take into account temperature $T$
and composition as well.

$P = P_{\rm i} + P_{\rm e} + P_{\rm r}.$

Ion pressure is typically perfect gas and can include electrons
(gas pressure $P_{\rm g} = P_{\rm i} + P_{\rm e}$) at low enough density.

$P_i = {\rho kT\over \mu m_{\rm H}},$

where $k$ is Boltzmann's constant, $m_{\rm H}$ is the mass of a
hydrogen atom and $\mu$ is the mean molecular weight.  When electrons
are included

${1\over\mu}\approx 2X + {3\over 4}Y + {1\over 2}Z,$

where $X$ is the mass fraction of hydrogen, $Y$ that of helium and $Z$
that of everything else, often called metals.  Changes in $\mu$ drive
evolution.


$P_{\rm e}$ is electron degeneracy pressure, a quantum mechanical
effect.  The Heisenberg uncertainty principle, that we cannot know the
position and velocity of a particle at the same time, means that as
electrons are squeezed into smaller and smaller volumes the must move
faster.  This requires work and so exerts a pressure.
     
Radiation pressure

$P_{\rm r} = {1\over 3}aT^4,$


where $a$ is the radiation constant, is important in hot regions of
massive stars.
      
## Energy Transport by Radiation
               
Suppose a photon typically moves a distance $\lambda$, its mean free path,
between emission and absorption or scattering.  Consider two surfaces
in a star separated by $\lambda$ with one slightly hotter, by $\delta
T$.  Both emit energy as black bodies.



```{figure} ../l2/figures/rad.pdf
---
height: 500px
name: fig:rad
---
Radiation transport.
```

%Figure rad.pdf
%Figure 3: Radiation transport.
               
There is a net radiation flux $\delta F$ from the hotter to the cooler
surface.  In a spherical star this amounts to a local luminosity

$L_r = 4\pi r^2\delta F.$

Now

$\delta F \approx -4\sigma T^3\delta T$

and we can relate $\delta T$ to the temperature gradient

$\delta T = \lambda{{\rm d}T\over{\rm d}r}.$

We also relate $\lambda$ to the opacity $\kappa$,
the cross-section per unit mass of stellar material so that

$\rho\kappa\lambda = 1.$

Combining everything and using $\sigma = ac/4$, where $c$ is the speed
of light, we arrive at

${{\rm d}T\over{\rm d}r} = {-\kappa\rho L_r\over 4\pi acr^2T^3}.$

This is almost correct but we have negelected the fact that photons
don't necessarily travel directly between the surfaces and should also
have integrated over all photon paths.  Had we done so we would arrive
at

${{\rm d}T\over{\rm d}r} = {-3\kappa\rho L_r\over 16\pi acr^2T^3}.$

Sources of opacity include electron scattering, absorption by
electrons around ions, molecular absorption etc. 
      
## Convection

When the temperature gradient is large energy can be transported by
bulk motion of the fluid.  Consider displacing an element of fluid
upwards against gravity in the star.


```{figure} ../l2/figures/conv.pdf
---
height: 500px
name: fig:cnv
---
Convection
```


%Figure conv.pdf
%Figure 4: Convection
      
The element must remain in pressure equilibrium with its surroundings
but does not immediately give up its heat.  It behaves adiabatically
and so its temperature and density adjust.  If the element is then
less dense than its surroundings it continues to rise carrying energy
with it until it eventually disipates at some larger radius.  Stellar
material must be unstable to convection if its radiative temperature
gradient

$\nabla_{\rm rad} = {3\kappa PL_r\over 16\pi acGT^4m} > \nabla_{\rm
ad} = \left({\partial\log T\over\partial\log P}\right)_S,$

its adiabatic temperature gradient, at constant entropy $S$.  In
general convection is very efficient so that convective zones in stars
are isentropic with temperature gradient equal to adiabatic
throughout.  Importantly composition is mixed in convective zones.
      
## Energy Generation
               

%Figure energy.pdf
Figure 5: Energy generation.



```{figure} ../l2/figures/energy.pdf
---
height: 500px
name: fig:energy
---
Energy generation 
```


The stellar luminosity is generated at a rate $\epsilon$ per unit
mass.  So

${{\rm d}L_r\over{\rm d}r} = 4\pi r^2\rho\epsilon.$

               
**Nuclear reactions** -- the major source of energy in a star.  The mass
of a helium nucleus is slightly less than four protons plus two
electrons so nuclear fusion creates energy from matter.  For reactions
to take place we require both the high end of the particle energy
distribution and quantum mechanical tunelling.  As a result reactions
are very temperature sensitive and so tend to be thermostatically
controlled, around $2\times 10^7\,$K for hydrogen burning and
$10^8\,$K for helium burning. 
               
**Gravitational contraction** -- in the absence of nuclear reactions
pressure support is lost and a star gradually contracts releasing
gravitational energy.  This is importnat during star formation.
               
**Neutrino losses** -- some energy is always lost by neutrinos during
fusion but at high denisities and temperatures neutrinos can be
spontaneously produced.  For instance very high energy photons can
spontaneously create an electron and positron pair.  Normally these
anihilate to form another photon but rarely a neutrino and an
antineutrino.  Neutrinos have a tiny cross-section to stellar material
and so escape from the star extracting energy.
      
## The Main Sequence


Approximately luminosity

$L_{\rm MS} \propto M^3$

while available fuel

$E_{\rm tot} \propto M$

so lifetime
$\tau_{\rm MS} \propto M^{-2}.$

The remaining lifetime is about $0.1\tau_{\rm MS}$.
For the Sun $\tau_{\rm MS}$ is about $10\,$Gyr.
      
## Stellar Evolution

%Figure fighr5ms.eps
%Figure 6: The evolution of a $5\,M_\odot$ star.




```{figure} ../l2/figures/fighr5m.png
---
height: 500px
name: fig:evol
---
The evolution of a $5\,M_\odot$ star.
```


1 -- zero age main sequence, $t = 0$, $X = 0.7$ throughout, convective core burning


    
2 -- $X_{\rm c} = 0.029$, $t = 100\,$Myr star contracts a bit
    
3 -- $X_{\rm c} = 0$, shell burning begins
    
4 -- $M_{\rm c} = 0.63$ gas pressure can no longer support the isothermal core
    
5 -- Hertzsprung gap, sub-giant phase, rapid evolution
    
6 -- base of the giant branch, a deep convective envelope dredges into the old core
    
7 -- core helium burning begins non-degenerately
    
8 to 10 -- core helium burning, the red clump
    
10 -- helium shell burning begins, the AGB
    
11 -- second dredge up, burning shells become very close
    
12 -- thermal pulses
    
13 -- Degenerate carbon ignition, real stars lose their envelope
before this to expose a carbon/oxygen white dwarf.
               
A $1\,M_\odot$ star evolves similarly except that a) main-sequence
hydrogen burning is radiative, b) helium ignites degenerately in a
thermonuclear runaway, the helium flash, and c) there is no second dredge
up.
               
Massive stars, above $15\,M_\odot$ ignite helium in the Hertzsprung
gap.
      
### Stellar Remnants
               
The final stages of a star's life are a competition between nuclear
burning and mass loss.  Removal of a star's envelope ends its life.
               
$M < 0.9\,M_\odot$ -- envelope lost on the RGB -- He white dwarf
     $0.9 < M/M_\odot < 8$ -- on the AGB -- CO white dwarf
$8 < M/M_\odot < 8.5$ -- on the SAGB -- ONeMg white dwarf
    
$8.5 < M/M_\odot < 25$ -- iron core reaches the Chandrasekhar mass --
neutron star
    
$M > 25\,M_\odot$ -- envelope lost during core helium burning -- naked
helium star -- neutron star or black hole
               
Evolution can be very different when a star has a close companion.


