(lecture_1)=
# Early life on Earth

Professor: **[Nick Butterfield](mailto:njb1005@cam.ac.uk)** ([Department of Earth Sciences](https://esc.cam.ac.uk))

---

```{highlights}

**Learning objectives:**
- Become familiar with basic thermodynamic relationships used to describe the equilibrium state of natural aqueous solutions
- Introduce the major classes of reactions common in aqueous solutions

```

The goal of this lecture is to introduce some key principles which we can use to understand and predict the chemistry of natural waters on Earth (and other rocky planetary bodies where water is/was present).

## Early life on Earth: interrogating the data

As far as we know (so far), ours is the only body in the Universe to support a biosphere.  What’s more, it appears to have done so for quite a long time.  There is a rich fossil record extending back through the Phanerozoic Eon – the last 540 million years of Earth history – and a more cryptic record through the preceding Proterozoic (2500 to 540 million years ago) and Archean (4000 to 2500 Ma) eons.  There are no surviving Hadean (> 4 Ga) rocks on Earth, which introduces some obvious, but not necessarily insurmountable, challenges to reconstructing a full record.  

**The early record – some ages**

```{list-table} The rock record
:header-rows: 1
:name: rock_record
:stub-columns: 1
:widths: 28 18 28

* - 
  - Age (Ga)
  - archive
* - Solar system
  - 4.567
  - **{term}`CAI`**s
* - Earth
  - 4.5
  - Terrestrial Pb deposits
* - Moon
  - 4.5
  - Lunar samples
* - Oldest Earth minerals
  - 4.4
  - Jack Hills zircons, Western Australia 
* - Oldest rocks
  - 4.03
  - Acasta Gneiss, Slave Province
* - Oldest metasediments
  - >3.7
  - Isua Supracrustal Belt, SW Greenland
* - Oldest well preserved seds
  - 3.5
  - Pilbara & Swaziland Supergroups
* - End of intense bombardment
  - ~3.9
  - Lunar cratering
```

There are various ways of addressing the evolutionary history of life on Earth, but the only direct approach is via the fossil record.  For our purposes, fossils can be defined as any evidence of past life preserved in the rock record, primarily (but not exclusively) in sedimentary rocks formed at the Earth’s surface.  Fossils come in three basic flavours:

1. **Body fossils** – anatomically preserved remains or equivalent representations of once-living organisms.  In the Precambrian (i.e. pre-Phanerozoic) record, these will be represented almost exclusively by microfossils.  There are all sorts of pitfalls however, not least in distinguishing true microfossils from more recently introduced microbes/contamination, and from diagenetic artifacts that can mimic microbial forms.  In other words, demonstrating syngenicity and biogenicity.

2. **Trace fossils** – sedimentary structures resulting from the presence and activity of once-living organisms.  Classic examples include the burrows and borings of (Phanerozoic) animals, but the earlier record is dominated by the effects of microbial mats on sedimentation, primarily via the trapping and binding of sedimentary grains on exposed surfaces and/or the biologically induced precipitation of early diagenetic cements associated with microbial metabolism..  Fossilized occurrences of this collective activity are known as microbialites and are best known from regularly-layered accretionary stromatolites (vs. clotted-fabric thrombolites).  As with body fossils, there are issues with distinguishing bona fide biogenic microbialites from superficially similar abiotic structures such as speleothems and diagenetic/tectonic artifacts.  Some skeletal organisms with accretionary growth also end up looking disturbingly stromatolitic.

3. **Chemical fossils** – (geo)chemical signatures derived from once-living organisms, or as a by-product of their metabolic activities.  The standard examples are taphonomically recalcitrant lipid biomarker molecules extractable from organic-rich sediments; e.g., dinosterane from dinoflagellates.  More generally, evidence of past life can be found in distinctively biogenic isotopic fractionations, or redox signatures associated with conditions substantially beyond thermodynamic equilibrium.  Evidence of an oxygen-rich atmosphere, for example, could be considered a ‘chemical fossil.’  As ever, there are first-order concerns with secondary alteration, contamination and interpretation. 

## Microbial relationships and phylogeny
All extant organisms share the same basic chemistry and cellular machinery – clear evidence that all extant life has descended from a single last common ancestor.  Deep phylogenetic relationships can potentially be resolved by comparing homologous features, particularly the macromolecular sequences that constitute nucleic acids and proteins.  When it comes to resolving the overall structure of the universal tree of life, the molecule of choice is small subunit ribosomal RNA (SSU rRNA) because it: 
-	is universally distributed
-	has a constant function (protein synthesis) 
-	is highly conserved/slowly evolving
-	is large enough to provide phylogenetic information
-	is not subject to substantial horizontal gene transfer

SSU rRNA (along with various other molecular, cellular and physiological features) points to the presence of three fundamental Domains of life:

**Archaea** (= ‘archaebacteria’) are represented by a metabolically and ecologically diverse range of prokaryotic (i.e., non-eukaryotic) microbes, including methanogens, haloarchaea and various hyperthermophilic (> 80°C) and acidophilic forms.  In addition to their distinct genetic signatures, the Archaea are united by the distinctive ether lipids of their cell membranes. 

**Bacteria** (= ‘eubacteria’) are represented by around 25 ‘phyla’ of prokaryotic microbes.  This phylogenetic diversity is matched by a comparable range of metabolic and ecological habits, but are generally less ‘extremophilic’ than Archaea, and do not include methanogens.  On the other hand, they are the only domain of life to have evolved true photosynthesis, both oxygenic (cyanobacteria) and anoxygenic (including chloroflexus, purple bacteria, green sulfur bacteria, and heliobacteria).  

**Eukarya** (= eukaryotes) include the three multicellular/tissue-grade Kingdoms (plants, animals and fungi), along with a massively diverse range of unicellular and multicellular (but sub-tissue-grade) protists.  The domain includes no known hyperthermophiles, or even thermophiles.  As eukaryotes evolved from within Archaea, strictly speaking there are only two truly fundamental domains of life…

## Microbial ecology/metabolism
Carbon-based life requires a replenishable source of both energy (ultimately in the form of electrons) and carbon.  There is a useful set of terms for describing the underlying metabolic strategies practiced by different organisms as they capture and recycle these resources:  

```{list-table} 
:header-rows: 0
:name: trophy
:stub-columns: 0
:widths: 28 28

* - If...
  - ...then the organism is...
* - the C source is CO2 
  - autotrophic
* - the C source is organic C then
  - heterotrophic				
* - the energy source is light 
  - photo-trophic
* - the energy source is chemical
  - chemo-trophic
* - the energy source is inorganic
  - -litho-trophic (e.g., chemolithoautotrophic)
* - the energy source is organic C
	- -organo-trophic (= heterotrophic)
```

Many microbes are capable of both photosynthesis and heterotrophy; i.e., mixotrophic.  Some are photoheterotrophic, deriving some of their energy from solar radiation (capturing and storing it as ATP), but unable to fix/synthesize their own reduced carbon.

## Stable Isotope Fractionation
Carbon has two important stable isotopes, $^{12}$C and $^{13}$C.  The $\delta^{13}$C notation indicates the $^{13}$C/$^{12}$C ratio of a sample relative to that of a standard in parts per thousand.  $\delta^{13}$C represents the isotopic fractionation between the biologically fixed organic carbon (Corg) and ‘abiotically’ precipitated carbonate carbon (Ccarb) 

Due to kinetic isotope effects during carbon fixation, $^{12}$C is preferentially incorporated into organic carbon during photosynthesis or chemosynthesis.  There are a number of biochemical pathways for carbon fixation, each of which imparts a characteristic range of carbon isotope values.  By far the most common, at least in the modern biosphere, is the Calvin-Benson cycle, which is based on the enzyme Rubisco (ribulose-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxidase).  Rubisco is directly responsible for a ~25$\permille$ fractionation in $\delta^{13}$C, with another 8$\permille$ contributed by temperature effects – giving a maximum $\delta^{13}$C of 33$\permille$.  Significantly, there is a stratigraphic record of isotopically depleted organic carbon – and correspondingly enriched carbonate carbon – extending back to the early Archean.  This 25–30$\permille$ difference is arguably the most convincing evidence for an active early Archean biosphere. 

Sulfur has two principal stable isotopes, $^{32}$S and $^{34}$S.  The $\delta^{34}$S notation indicates the ratio of a sample relative to that of a standard in parts per thousand.  In marine sediments, $\Delta\delta^{34}$S represents the isotopic fractionation between seawater sulfate and sulfide and is mediated by various types of sulfur-metabolizing microbes.
 
Sulfate reducing bacteria (SRB) preferentially metabolize $^{32}$S resulting in isotopic fractionations of 40–45$\permille$, but only where sulfate is non-limiting.  Low levels of fractionation imply low sulfate concentrations – or potentially an absence of SRB.  The presence of low but measurable $\delta^{34}$S fractionation in early Archean sulfates/sulfides points to the early establishment of SRB.  

## Early Archean environments
Fossils are preserved in rocks, and it is important to appreciate that this geological archive disappears by around 4 Ga – a consequence of (external) weathering and (internal) tectonic cycling.  At the same time, the signal that does survive is further confused by the non-uniformitarian nature of the processes themselves.  The early Archean atmosphere, for example, contained no significant oxygen, under a sun that was 30% less luminous than today’s, and on a planet that had yet to differentiate most of its continental lithosphere.  The current textbook view holds that modern-style plate tectonics only fired up in the later Archean, with the early Archean represented largely by Granite Greenstone Belts.  The supracrustal greenstones are represented by huge thicknesses of basalts, within which are slivers of sedimentary successions – and the primary focus of attention in the search for the earliest life on Earth.  The best preserved of these are on the Pilbara craton, NW Australia and the Kaapvaal craton (Barberton Greenstone Belt) in southern Africa.  The oldest is the ~ 3.8 Ga Isua Greenstone Belt in SW Greenland.  

Based on a combination of (possible) microfossils, (probable) microbialites, and carbon isotope data ($\Delta\delta^{13}$C), there is a compelling case for recognizing the presence of life on Earth by at least 3.5 Ga –  and a reasonable one for extending this to ~ 3.8 Ga.   The rest is just history – a co-evolutionary interplay of organisms and environment.

## References
[Allwood AC, et al. 2009. Controls on development and diversity of early Archean stromatolites. PNAS 106:9548–9555.](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0903323106)

[Allwood AC, et al. 2018. Reassessing evidence of life in 3,700-million-year-old rocks of Greenland. Nature](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0610-4)

[Boehnke P, Harrison TM. 2016. Illusory late heavy bombardments. PNAS 113:10802–10806.](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1611535113)

[Brasier MD, et al. 2015. Changing the picture of Earth’s earliest fossils (3.5–1.9 Ga) with new approaches and new discoveries. PNAS 112:4859–4864.](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1405338111)

[Buick R. 2012. Geobiology of the Archean Eon. Pp. 351–370 in Knoll et al. (eds.), Fundamentals of Geobiology. Wiley-Blackwell, Chichester.](https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118280874.ch19)

[Coutant M, et al. 2022. Distinguishing cellular from abiotic spheroidal microstructures in the ca. 3.4 Ga Strelley Pool Formation. Geobiology 20, 599-622.](https://doi.org/10.1111/gbi.12506)

[Heubeck C, et al. 2023. Stromatolite-like structures within microbially laminated sandstones of the Paleoarchean Moodies Group, Barberton Greenstone Belt, South Africa. Astrobiology 23, 926–935.](https://doi.org/10.1089/ast.2023.0014)

[Hickman AH. 2012. Review of the Pilbara Craton and Fortescue Basin, Western Australia: crustal evolution providing environments for early life. Island Arc 21, 1–31.](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1440-1738.2011.00783.x)

[Javaux, E.J. 2019. Challenges in evidencing the earliest traces of life. Nature 572, 451–460.](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1436-4)

[Kellermeier, et al. 2012. Silica biomorphs: complex biomimetic hybrid materials from “sand and chalk”. European Journal of Inorganic Chemistry 2012, 5123–5144.](https://doi.org/10.1002/ejic.201201029)

[Konhauser, K 2007. Introduction to Geomicrobiology. Blackwell, Malden, Mass Pace A, et al. 2018. Formation of stromatolite lamina at the interface of oxygenic–anoxygenic photosynthesis. Geobiology 16, 378–398.](https://doi.org/10.1111/gbi.12281)

[Lepot K. 2020. Signatures of early microbial life from the Archean (4 to 2.5 Ga) eon. Earth-Science Reviews 209, 103296.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.earscirev.2020.103296)

[Mojzsis SJ et al. 1996. Evidence for life on Earth before 3,800 million years ago. Nature 384, 55–59.](https://doi.org/10.1038/384055a0)

[Reid RP, et al. 2000. The role of microbes in accretion, lamination and early lithification of modern marine stromatolites. Nature, 406, 989–992.](https://doi.org/10.1038/35023158)

[Rosing MT. 1999. 13C-depleted carbon microparticles in >3700-Ma sea-floor sedimentary rocks from West Greenland. Science 283:674–676.](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.283.5402.674)

[Rouillard J, et al. 2018. A morphogram for silica‐witherite biomorphs and its application to microfossil identification in the early earth rock record. Geobiology 16, 279–296.](https://doi.org/10.1111/gbi.12278)

[Rouillard J, et al. 2020, An alternative approach for assessing biogenicity. Astrobiology 21, 151–164.](https://doi.org/10.1089/ast.2020.2282)

[Schopf JW, et al. 2007. Evidence of Archean life: stromatolites and microfossils. Precambrian Research 158:141–155.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.precamres.2007.04.009)

[Sugitani K, et al. 2015. A Paleoarchean coastal hydrothermal field inhabited by diverse microbial communities: the Strelley Pool Formation, Pilbara Craton, Western Australia. Geobiology](https://doi.org/10.1111/gbi.12150).

[Ueno Y, et al. 2006. Evidence from fluid inclusions for microbial methanogenesis in the early Archaean era. Nature 440:516–519.](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature04584)

[Valley JW, et al. 2002. A cool early Earth. Geology 30:351–354.](https://doi.org/10.1130/0091-7613(2002)030%3C0351:ACEE%3E2.0.CO;2)

[Wacey D, et al. 2018. Remarkably preserved tephra from the 3430 Ma Strelley Pool Formation, Western Australia: implications for the interpretation of Precambrian microfossils. EPSL 487, 33–43.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epsl.2018.01.021)

[Wacey D, et al. 2018. Volcanogenic pseudo-fossils from the ∼3.48 Ga Dresser Formation, Pilbara, Western Australia. Astrobiology 18, 539–555. van Zuilen MA, et al. 2002. Reassessing the evidence for the earliest traces of life. Nature 418, 627–630.](https://doi.org/10.1089/ast.2017.1734)