(lecture_19)=
# Planetary cycles I: Mantle Convection 

Professor: **[David Al-Attar](mailto:da380@cam.ac.uk)** ([Department of Earth Sciences](https://esc.cam.ac.uk))

---

```{highlights}

**Learning objectives:**
- The Earth's mantle exhibits a time-dependent rheology. Over time-scales of millions of years, it behaves like a viscous fluid. 
- Viscosity is a strongly decreasing function of temperature. The cool outer part of the Earth is known as the lithosphere, and is responds elastic over geological time. It is the warmer regions below the lithosphere that undergo convection. 
- Mantle convection can be understood using standard equations of fluid mechanics, with balance laws
stated  for mass, linear momentum and energy. 
- Scaling analysis helps us to understand the relative magnitudes of the terms within the governing equations, and hence 
which physical processes are most important.
- The Earth's mantle has a high Rayleigh number, and so must undergo vigorous time-dependent convection over a range 
of length-scales. 
- Convection in the mantle contributes to long-wavelength gravity anomalies and dynamic topography at the Earth's surface. 
```

## Introduction

The aim of this lecture is to summarise the key physical principles governing convection within the Earth's mantle. Though our focus is on the Earth, the same rules, presumably, apply within other Earth-like planets. 


## Mantle rheology

Mantle convection  can be understood in terms 
of fluid mechanics. But the Earth's mantle is very much a solid. 
To understand this, we need to consider the rheological behaviour 
of the mantle. By the  **rheology** of a material we mean the quantitative 
relationship between deformation and stress. The key idea is that the mantle exhibits a 
**time-dependent** rheology, this meaning, roughly, that the 
response to forcing depends on the time-scale over which 
it is applied. 

 Within the following discussion we will write $\sigma$ for the stress
and $\epsilon$ for the strain. Strictly, these are 
tensor-fields, but this is not important for the moment. 


### End member behaviour

To begin, we consider two simple rheologies that 
describe the end-member behaviour of the mantle. 
Within an **elastic solid**, stress and strain are 
related by **Hooke's law** which we write as
```{math}
\newcommand{\ee}{\mathrm{e}}\newcommand{\ii}{\mathrm{i}}\newcommand{\ddns}{\,\mathrm{d}}
\sigma = \mu \epsilon, 
```
with $\mu$ an elastic modulus. Here we see that the 
application of a constant force (and hence stress) results
in a constant strain. If the force is removed, the strain 
then returns to zero. 

In a **Newtonian fluid** stress is proportional to the 
time-derivative of the strain (usually called the **strain-rate**), 
and hence we can write
```{math}
\sigma = \eta \dot{\epsilon}, 
```
where $\eta$ is the viscosity and a dot is used to 
denote time-differentiation. If a constant force is 
applied to such a material, there is a constant strain-rate, and hence the strain grows linearly with time. 
If the force is removed the strain-rate goes to zero, but 
there will be an accumulated strain. Within a fluid, transient 
forces can result in permanent deformation. 

### Maxwell solids

The simplest working model for the mantle's rheology is that 
of a **Maxwell solid**. In this case, the relation between 
stress and strain can be written
```{math}
\dot{\sigma} + \tau^{-1} \sigma = \mu \dot{\epsilon}
```
Here $\tau$ is a constant known as the  **relaxation time** and $\mu$
is an elastic modulus. 

To gain insight into the behaviour of such a material, suppose
that the strain is initially zero, that at time $0$ 
it jumps to a finite value $\epsilon_{0}$, then is
 held constant. If we integrate the above relation
over the interval $(-\delta,\delta)$ and let $\delta \rightarrow 0$, 
we find that the stress at time $t=0$ undergoes a finite-jump 
to the value $\sigma_{0} = \mu \epsilon_{0}$. Note that 
the stress generated is equal to that that would be 
seen within an elastic material with modulus $\mu$.
Using this  initial elastic value for the stress, we can then solve the ODE for $t> 0$ 
to obtain
```{math}
\sigma(t) = \sigma_{0} \ee^{-t/\tau}, 
```
This shows that the initial stress decreases exponentially at a rate set by the relaxation time. 

Such behaviour is representative of that occurring within crystalline materials. The 
initial elastic response to the applied strain can be understood 
in terms of deformation of the crystal lattice. Subsequently, 
stresses are relaxed through the movement of lattice defects, 
with these motions occurring over a characteristic relaxation time.
In fact, within a real crystal there will 
typically be a host of different mechanisms, and so it is 
more correct to think of a **spectrum of relaxation times**
and not just the single value present within the Maxwell model.
An important example of such a mechanism is the migration of
lattice vacancies in response to an applied stress. This process, which is  known as **diffusion creep**, is thought to be the pricinple 
mechanism by which the mantle flows over geological time. 

```{figure} figures/creep.gif
---
name: fig:02creep
width: 70%
---
A schematic representation of diffusion creep within crystals
in response to an applied stress. As the vacancies move, 
the overall stress is lowered, and further macroscopic
deformation occurs. There are several 
mechanisms by which vacancies can move, including 
diffusion through the crystal interior (Nabarro-Herring Creep)
or along grain boundaries (Coble Creep). Figure taken from
Bhadeshia (2003)
```

To gain further insight into the behaviour of a Maxwell
solid, we can consider its response to a time-harmonic 
forcing. In this case, we can express the stress and 
strain as in the form
```{math}
\sigma(t) = \tilde{\sigma} \mathrm{e}^{\mathrm{i}\omega t}, \quad 
\epsilon(t) = \tilde{\epsilon} \mathrm{e}^{\mathrm{i}\omega t}, 
```
with $\omega$ the oscillation frequency, and tilded terms 
the amplitudes. Note that the use of complex numbers is for convenience, and it is the real parts that are physically meaningful. Putting the 
above expressions into the governing relation for a Maxwell
solid, we obtain
```{math}
\tilde{\sigma} = \tilde{\mu}(\omega) \tilde{\epsilon}, 
```
where we have introduced a frequency-dependent **viscoelastic
modulus**
```{math}
\tilde{\mu}(\omega) = \frac{\mathrm{i}\omega\tau }{\mathrm{i}\omega\tau + 1} \mu.
```
This shows that the constant of proportionality  between the stress and strain amplitudes is 
both frequency-dependent and complex valued. The latter feature is associated with a phase delay between forcing and response, though
this property is not crucial to our present discussion. It is this 
frequency-dependence, however, that makes precise the idea of
a time-dependent rheology. In particular, we can now examine
quantitatively the  low and high-frequency limiting behaviour 
of a Maxwell solid.

High-frequencies are those for which $\omega \tau \gg 1$, and in such 
cases we have the approximate relation
```{math}
\tilde{\sigma} \approx \mu \tilde{\epsilon}, 
```
this being identical to what would be seen within an 
elastic solid. Thus, when the material is deformed at a rate 
that is fast relative to the relaxation time, it behaves like 
an elastic solid.  Conversely, at low-frequencies, we have
$\omega \tau \ll 1$, in which case 
```{math}
\tilde{\sigma} \approx \mathrm{i}\omega \mu \tau \tilde{\epsilon}. 
```
Noting that $\mathrm{i}\omega \tilde{\epsilon}$ is the amplitude of the 
strain-rate, we see that the behaviour is that of a Newtonian 
fluid with viscosity 
```{math}
\eta = \mu \tau.
```


### More general viscoelastic rheologies

We have now shown that a Maxwell solid has the correct limiting 
behaviours seen within the Earth's mantle. More detailed observations 
make clear that the mantle's rheology is more complicated. 
Indeed, we noted above that within real crystals there will 
typically be a whole spectrum of relaxation times associated with 
different microscopic mechanisms. Nonetheless, the same 
form of low-frequency limiting behaviour of a Newtonian fluid 
can be expected under reasonable assumptions. To see this, suppose that the 
viscoelastic modulus for a Maxwell solid is generalised to 
```{math}
\tilde{\mu}(\omega) = \int_{\tau_{1}}^{\tau_{2}} \frac{\mathrm{i}\omega\tau }{\mathrm{i}\omega\tau + 1} m(\tau) \dd \tau, 
```
with $m(\tau)$ a function that quantifies the relaxation 
spectrum which we assume is limited to the range $0 < \tau_{1} \le \tau_{2} < \infty$. We can then consider the low-frequency limit, meaning 
 $\omega \tau_{2} \ll 1$, for which we find
 ```{math}
 \tilde{\mu}(\omega) \approx \mathrm{i} \omega \int_{\tau_{1}}^{\tau_{2}}
 \tau m(\tau) \dd \tau, 
 ```
 and hence that the effective viscosity is given by 
 ```{math}
 \eta = \int_{\tau_{1}}^{\tau_{2}}
 \tau m(\tau) \dd \tau.
 ```
 Similarly, at high-frequencies, $\omega \tau_{1} \gg 1$, such a material behaves 
 elastically with effective modulus
 ```{math}
 \mu = \int_{\tau_{1}}^{\tau_{2}}
  m(\tau) \dd \tau.
 ```
 This shows that the effective elastic modulus and viscosity can 
 still be related by the simple expression 
 ```{math}
 \eta = \mu \bar{\tau}, 
 ```
 where we have defined the average relaxation time
 ```{math}
 \bar{\tau} = \frac{\int_{\tau_{1}}^{\tau_{2}}
 \tau m(\tau) \dd \tau}{\int_{\tau_{1}}^{\tau_{2}}
  m(\tau) \dd \tau}.
 ```
 

 It should be noted that the above discussion has been 
 limited to **linear rheologies**. For sufficiently large strains or strain-rates, non-linear effects can be relevant and this 
 is likely to be true for certain aspects of mantle 
 dynamics. Accounting for such non-linearity adds complications 
 to the above discussion, but does not alter the main points
 that  have been emphasised. 

### Estimates mantle viscosity

An order of magnitude estimate on the relaxation  time 
for the Earth's mantle can be obtained through the study of 
**glacial isostatic adjustement**. This is the deformation 
of the solid Earth and concomitant sea level change associated
with the growth or melting of large ice sheets. There is not 
time to enter into this process in any detail, but observations
linked to the previous glacial period show that the relaxation 
time for the mantle is of order $10^4$ years. 

```{figure} figures/sea_level.png
---
name: fig:02sea_level
---
Past sea level curves from locations 
under the centre of large ice sheets during the last glacial period. 
Since the ice has melted, these regions have undergone
significant uplift, and hence sea level fall, due to 
viscoelastic relaxation of stress. The observed response can 
be well-modelled by an exponential decay, with the 
associated time-scale providing an 
estimate for the mantle's Maxwell time of 
order 5000 years. Figure taken from Peltier (2004)
```


From our previous discussion, we know that mantle viscosity 
is related to the relaxation time through 
```{math}
\eta = \mu \tau, 
```
with $\mu$ an  elastic modulus. An appropriate
value for $\mu$ can be obtained from seismological models 
for the Earth, with $\mu \sim 10^{11}$ Pa being a suitable 
order of magnitude estimate. Recalling that one year is 
around $10^{7}$ s, we find $\eta \sim 10^{21}$ Pa s.
For comparison, this is greater than the viscosity of 
water by twenty one orders of magnitude!

The study of glacial isostatic adjustment can also 
provide more detailed quantitative models 
of viscosity variations within the Earth. For example, 
it has been shown that the viscosity increases by between the 
upper and lower parts of the mantle  by around one order of 
magnitude. Such a change in viscosity is likely 
due to solid-state phase changes within the 
minerals the make up the mantle, and both 
factors have potentially important
effects on spatial pattern of convection. 
Such details are not, however,
vital for our present discussion. 


### Temperature and pressure dependence of viscosity

The viscosity of the mantle is set principally by 
the relaxation time,  with this quantity reflecting the 
aggregate effect of a host of microphysical processes. 
The relaxation time, and hence viscosity, is known to be 
a highly
sensitive function of temperature, $T$,  and pressure, $p$. This 
relation is complicated and not well-determined, but 
a reasonable model is given by 
```{math}
\tau = \tau_{0} \exp\left( \frac{E_{0} + p V_{0}}{k T}\right), 
```
where $E_{0}$ is a reference activation energy,  $V_{0}$ a reference 
volume, and $k$ the Boltzmann constant. For those familiar with 
statistical mechanics, the form of this expression is motivated by 
the Boltzmann distribution, and reflects the 
fact that the microphysical mechanisms require 
energy barriers to be overcome, with the 
probability that this happens being higher 
and higher temperatures.

The strong temperature dependence of viscosity within 
the mantle is central to understanding the Earth's interior dynamics 
along with related processes such as plate tectonics. 
As temperature decreases, relaxation time rises dramatically. 
Within sufficiently cool shallow parts of the Earth, 
the relaxation time can be so great  that the material 
behaves elastically over geological time. This region of the 
Earth is called the **lithosphere**. It is known be around 100 km thick,  comprising the Earth's crust (which has an average thickness of about 35 km) and the upper part of the Mantle. It should be 
emphasised that the crust and mantle are compositionally distinct, with the former having, in broadest outline, formed through partial melting of the latter. The lithosphere, by contrast, is not defined in terms 
of its composition but from its long-term **mechanical behaviour**.


## Physical principles governing mantle convection

We now review the physical principles governing convection within 
the Earth's mantle. While the necessary partial differential equations 
are stated along with brief derivations, our emphasis is on the 
physical processes they described and on the quantification of their relative importance using **scaling analysis**.

### Conservation of mass

Consider a sub-region $U$ within the mantle. The mass of 
the fluid within the sub-region at an instant of time 
can be written 
```{math}
\int_{U} \rho \dd V, 
```
with $\rho$ the density. If the sub-region is fixed in space, 
its mass can change only through the flux of matter through 
its boundary, $\partial U$, and hence we can write
```{math}
\frac{\,\mathrm{d} }{\,\mathrm{d} t}\int_{U} \rho \dd V = -\int_{\partial U}
\rho \hat{\mathbf{n}} \cdot \mathbf{u} \dd S, 
```
where $\mathbf{u}$ is the velocity field, and $\hat{\mathbf{n}}$
the outward unit normal. Using the divergence theorem, it can 
be shown that this balance law is equivalent to the local statement
```{math}
\frac{\partial \rho}{\partial t} + \nabla \cdot(\rho \mathbf{u}) = 0.
```

Flow within a fluid is said to be **incompressible** if the volume of 
a region that is carried with the flow cannot change. Mathematically, 
it can be shown that this condition is equivalent to
```{math}
\nabla \cdot \mathbf{u} = 0.
```
All real fluids are compressible to some extent, but incompressibility 
can be a useful simplifying approximation in certain problems, with 
mantle convection being one of them. The equation for conservation of mass
then simplifies to 
```{math}
\frac{\partial \rho}{\partial t} + \mathbf{u} \cdot \nabla \rho = 0,
```
with the second term now representing the advection of the density 
 along with the flow. 

### Conservation of momentum

Let $U$ again be a fixed sub-region of the mantle. The balance of linear
momentum can be written
```{math}
\frac{\,\mathrm{d} }{\,\mathrm{d} t}\int_{U} \rho \mathbf{u} \dd V = 
-\int_{\partial U} \rho \mathbf{u}\, \hat{\mathbf{n}}\cdot \mathbf{u} \dd S
+ \int_{\partial U } \mathbf{\sigma} \hat{\mathbf{n}}  \dd S + 
\int_{U} \rho \mathbf{g} \dd V, 
```
where $\bf{\sigma}$ is the stress tensor, and $\mathbf{g}$ the 
acceleration due to gravity. The first term on the 
right hand side represents the advection of linear momentum along 
the flow. The second term is the total contact force on the sub-region
from its surroundings. Finally, the final term on the right hand side represents the gravitational force on the sub-region, with this force being  generated by the totality of the Earth's mass distribution. 

It should be noted that the fact that the force per unit area on 
the boundary can be expressed in terms of a stress tensor
and the unit normal is actually a consequence of the 
balance of linear momentum, this following from an 
argument due to Cauchy. Similarly, the balance of 
angular momentum within a fluid is equivalent to the 
stress tensor being symmetric. 

The stress tensor within a viscous fluid can be usefully 
decomposed as
```{math}
\bf{\sigma} = -p \mathbf{1} + \mathbf{\tau}, 
```
where $p$ is the pressure, and $\bf{\tau}$ the devatoric stress
which is defined through the requirement that its trace vanishes.
Assuming, for simplicity, that the fluid is incompressible, we can 
then write
```{math}
\bf{\tau} = 2 \eta \dot{\mathbf{e}}, 
```
where $\eta$ is the viscosity and $\dot{\mathbf{e}}$ the 
strain-rate tensor which is defined through
```{math}
\dot{e}_{ij} = \frac{1}{2}\left( \frac{\partial u_{i}}{\partial x_{j}} + \frac{\partial u_{j}}{\partial x_{i}} \right).
```

Using the divergence theorem and simplifying using the local 
form of mass conservation, the balance of linear momentum
becomes
```{math}
\rho \frac{\partial \mathbf{u}}{\partial t} + \rho 
\mathbf{u} \cdot \nabla \mathbf{u} + \nabla p 
- \nabla \cdot \bf{\tau} + \rho \nabla \phi = \mathbf{0}
```
where we have now expressed the gravitational acceleration 
in terms of a potential, $\phi$. This is an instance 
of the famous **Navier Stokes equations**. 

### Conservation of energy

Conservation of thermal energy within the fluid 
can be written
```{math}
\frac{\,\mathrm{d}}{\,\mathrm{d} t } \int_{U} \rho C_{p} T \dd V
= -\int_{\partial U} \rho C_{p} T \hat{\mathbf{n}} \cdot
\mathbf{u} \dd S + \int_{\partial U} k \hat{\mathbf{n}} \cdot
\nabla T \dd S + \int_{U} \rho H \dd V. 
```
Here $T$ is the temperature and $C_{p}$ the heat capacity per
unit mass. The product $C_{p} T$ is the thermal energy density 
per unit mass. The first term on
the right hand side represents the transfer of thermal energy into 
the sub-region through advection with the fluid flow. The second 
term is associated with the conduction of heat as described by 
Fourier's law, with $k$ the  **thermal conductivity**. The final term, $H$, 
is the heat production within the fluid per unit mass. The main 
contributions to this term within the mantle are from:

- energy released on the decay of radioactive isotopes;
- viscous dissipation of mechanical energy. 

It will not be necessary to examine either of these terms in detail
within this lecture. 

Passing in the usual manner to their local forms, the 
conservation of energy becomes
```{math}
\rho C_{p} \frac{\partial T}{\partial t} + \rho C_{p} \mathbf{u}\cdot
\nabla T  - \nabla \cdot (k \nabla T) - \rho H  = 0.
```
For later reference, we note that the ratio
```{math}
\kappa = \frac{k}{\rho C_{p}}, 
```
defines the **thermal diffusivity**.


## Scaling analysis of convection in the mantle

The equations governing convection within the mantle 
form a complicated set of coupled non-linear partial 
differential equations. They admit no simple solutions, 
and most work in this field depends on large-scale numerical 
calculations. Nevertheless, much useful information 
can be learned about the problem using scaling analysis. 
Indeed, such an analysis can be used to identify which 
are the most important physical processes involved
and those that can be neglected. 


### The Reynolds number

We first consider the relative importance of 
inertia and viscous forces within the Earth's mantle. 
The magnitude of the first inertia term within the 
equations of motion can be estimated as:
```{math}
\rho \frac{\partial \mathbf{u}}{\partial t} \sim 
\frac{\rho U}{ T}, 
```
where on the right $\rho$ denotes a typical density,
$U$ a typical magnitude of the velocity, and $T$ the 
characteristic time-scale for the flow. Here the 
symbol $\sim$ should be read as meaning "approximate order
of magnitude". In a similar manner, we can 
scale the viscous term 
```{math}
\nabla \cdot ( 2 \eta \dot{\bf{\epsilon}}) \sim \frac{\eta U}{L^{2}}, 
```
where $L$ is a characteristic length-scale for the flow. Note that 
the factor of two on the left hand side is ignored because this
does not matter to an order of magnitude. The ratio of these 
two terms defines the *Reynolds number*:
```{math}
\mathrm{Re} = \frac{\frac{\rho U}{ T}}{\frac{\eta U}{L^{2}} } 
= \frac{\rho L^{2}}{\eta T}.
```
To simplify, we use the fact that $U \sim L / T$, and hence 
```{math}
\mathrm{Re}  = \frac{\rho L U}{\eta}.
```

We can now use this formula to estimate the Reynolds number for the mantle. We already have an order of magnitude estimate for
the viscosity of $10^{21}$ Pa s. For the density, we can use
the Earth's average density which implies we 
take $\rho \sim 10^{3}$ kg m $^{-3}$. For the length-scale, 
we can take the depth of the mantle which is of order $10^{6}$ m. 
The only tricky thing to estimate is the typical velocity of the 
flow. To do this, we will use the speed at which tectonic plates are 
observed to move. As we discuss further in the next lecture, the 
relationship between plate tectonics and mantle convection 
is not entirely straightforward. But to an order of magnitude
such an estimate should be acceptable. A typical plate 
speed might be of order 1 cm per year, or $10^{-9}$ m s $^{-1}$. 
Putting all this together, we find
```{math}
\mathrm{Re} \sim \frac{10^{3} 10^{6} 10^{-9}}{10^{21}} = 10^{-21}.
```

This is a tiny number, a shows that for mantle dynanmics 
inertial forces play essentially no role. Instead, at each 
instance of time, there is a near perfect balance between 
gravitational driving forces and viscous resistance. 
It therefore makes sense to simplify the Navier Stokes
equations to 
```{math}
 \nabla p - \nabla \cdot \bf{\tau} + \rho \nabla \phi = \mathbf{0}
```
which is known as the **Stokes equation**.

It should be commented that our analysis was based only 
on the first of the inertia terms and not $\rho \mathbf{u} \cdot
\nabla \mathbf{u}$. If you wish, you can scale this term to see that
it behaves identically to the inertial term we did consider. 


### The Peclet number

Within the equation for conservation of energy, we see that 
heat can be transferred by either advection or conduction. 
The advective term can be scaled as
```{math}
\rho C_{p} \mathbf{u} \cdot \nabla T \sim \rho C_{p} \frac{U \Theta}{L}, 
```
where we note that $\Theta$ is used for the magnitude of the temperature
as we have already used $T$ for the time-scale. 
For the conductive heat transfer, then have
```{math}
\nabla \cdot (k \nabla T) \sim k \frac{\Theta}{L^{2}}. 
```
Dividing the advective term by the conductive, we arrive at
the **Peclet number**
```{math}
\mathrm{Pe} = \frac{ U L }{ \kappa  }, 
```
where we have recalled the definition of the thermal
diffusivity, $\kappa$. Typical values of 
$\kappa \sim 10^{-6}$  for mantle materials can be estimated
experimentally. Combining this with our earlier estimates, we 
find
```{math}
\mathrm{Pe} \sim \frac{10^{-9} 10^{6}}{10^{-6}} \sim 10^{3}.
```
This suggests that advective heat transport is substantially
 more important than conductive within the mantle, though the ratio is not 
so large that we can entirely discount the role of 
heat conduction. There is, however, an important physical 
consequence of having a high Peclet number. Heat conduction 
acts to smooth out sharp temperature gradients. This follows
from Fourier's law, which states that the conductive heat 
flux is proportional to the gradient of the temperature. 
Advection, by contrast, does not smooth temperature
gradients to a comparable extent. For example, 
a uniform flow simply translates existing temperature 
gradients. The dominance of
advective heat transport within the mantle means that if 
rapid changes of temperature are somehow generated, then 
they can be carried with the flow for a relatively
long time. Looking ahead, this point is important 
in understanding the dyanmical behaviour of subducted slabs and mantle plumes.

### The Rayleigh number

Consider a fluid that is in both mechanical and thermal equilibrium.
If a sub-region of the fluid has its temperature raised by an 
amount, $\Delta T$, it will experience an buoyancy force
that scales like
```{math}
\rho \alpha \Delta T g L^{3}, 
```
where $\alpha$ is the thermal expansivity, and $L$ the 
the characteristic length-scale of the region. In response
to this force, the sub-region will flow upwards. We 
can estimate its initial velocity by balancing the 
buoyancy force against that due to viscous resistance. 
To estimate the latter, we first note that the resulting
deviatoric stress scales as 
```{math}
\bf{\tau} \sim \frac{\eta U}{L}, 
```
where we have assumed that the length-scale of the flow 
is comparable to that of the sub-region. We can convert
this into a force by multiply by the surface area of the sub-region, 
and hence the viscous resistance scales as
```{math}
\eta U L.
```
Balancing the two forces, we find that
```{math}
U \sim \frac{\rho \alpha \Delta T g L^{2}, }{\eta}.
```
Note that this velocity scales like $L^{2}$, and 
hence larger thermal anomalises will move much 
faster.

Heat conduction will also act to lower the temperature
anomaly within the sub-region. As it does so, the 
buoyancy force driving the flow is lessened. And hence, 
if conductive heat loss occurs sufficiently rapidly the 
flow will be suppressed. To examine this quantitatively, 
we can estimate characteristic time-scales for either 
process. The time-scale for the flow to move the 
sub-region a distance $l$ is
```{math}
t_{a} \sim \frac{L}{U} = \frac{\eta}{\rho \alpha \Delta T g L}, 
```
where the subscript $a$ stands for advection. To estimate the 
corresponding time-scale for conduction, we start
from a simplified form of energy conservation
```{math}
\rho C_{p} \frac{\partial T}{\partial t} = \nabla \cdot(k \nabla T), 
```
which we can scale to obtain
```{math}
 \frac{\rho C_{p} \Delta T}{t_{c}} \sim \frac{k \Delta T}{L^{2}}, 
```
where $t_{c}$ is the conductive time-scale. Solving the latter 
equation for $t_{c}$, we obtain
```{math}
t_{c} \sim \frac{L^{2}}{\kappa}, 
```
where we have again used the definition of the 
thermal diffusivity. We can now form the 
ratio of the conductive to advective time-scales,
this defining the **Rayleigh number** for the problem
```{math}
\mathrm{Ra} = \frac{t_{c}}{t_{a}} = \frac{\rho \alpha \Delta T g L^{3}}{\kappa \eta}.
```
A key observation is that the Rayleigh number's dependence
on the length-scale goes like $L^{3}$. This shows that
relative importance of advection is larger for 
larger anomalies. It follows that if convective 
instabilities most readily occur at the largest 
possible length-scales.

A limitation of our simple scaling analysis is that 
we cannot know how large the Rayleigh number 
need be for the onset of convection.   However, this quantity
also occurs within   a **linearised stability analysis** of the 
governing equations. There is not time to 
cover these details, but they show that 
when the Rayleigh number is larger than 
some critical value, $\mathrm{Ra}_{c}$, convection will occur.
The precise value depends on the geometry considered, 
but $\mathrm{Ra}_{c} \sim 10^{3}$ is a representative value. 



The above analysis can now be applied to the Earth's mantle 
to assess whether it is likely to undergo convection. In doing this,
 it makes sense  to choose the length-scale of the flow to be as large
as possible, and so we take $L$ to be the thickness 
of the mantle. Experiments on mantle minerals show 
that $\alpha \sim 10^{-5}$ K $^{-1}$ is an 
appropriate estimate. Determining a sensible 
value for $\Delta T$, which can be viewed as the 
temperature difference from the bottom to 
top of the mantle, is more difficult. Instead, 
we will determine what temperature difference across the 
mantle would be required for convection to occur, and 
 then consider if such a value seems plausible. 
Solving  for $\Delta T$ within the Rayleigh number, we find
```{math}
\Delta T \sim  \frac{\kappa \eta \mathrm{Ra}_{c}}{\rho \alpha g L^{3}}  \sim \frac{10^{-6} 10^{21} 10^{3}}{10^{3} 10^{-5} 10^{1} 10^{18}}\, \mathrm{K} \sim 1 \,\mathrm{K}
```
Here we see that a temperature difference of order only one Kelvin would be sufficient for the mantle to convect! Given other 
geological information (volcanism, geothermal heat, radioactive heating) it is entirely implausible that the temperature difference across
the mantle is smaller than this value, and hence convection 
must certainly occur. 

```{figure} figures/rayleigh.png
---
name: fig:02rayleigh
---
Convection patterns of a fluid heated from below at Rayleigh number $10^{3}$ , $10^{6}$ , $10^{7}$ , $10^{8}$. The colour
show non-dimensional temperatures. For the lowest
Rayleigh number, lying just above the critical value, large
scale convection cells form that undergo a quasi-steady flow. For 
larger values of the Rayleigh number, the convective patterns
are more complicated, involve a range of length-scales, 
and are  and strongly time-dependent. Figure taken from Ricard (2007).
```

In fact, plausible estimates for the mantle's 
Rayleigh number are typically of order $10^{6}-10^{7}$, and so around
one thousand times larger than the critical value. At such high
Rayleigh numbers, instabilities are not limited to the largest 
possible length-scales. Instead, complicated and time-dependent 
patterns of convection spanning a range of length-scales must occur. 


## Consequences of convection at the Earth's surface

To conclude this lecture, we consider two
consequences of mantle convection that are observable at the 
Earth's surface, namely **gravity anomalies** and **dynamic 
topography**. These are not the only surface features 
linked to mantle convection, but most others on Earth are 
associated with to **plate tectonics**. Whether or not an
Earth-like planet has plate tectonics, we would expect there
to be gravity anomalies and dynamic topography linked to 
convection within its interior. Convection within the mantle is, however, not the only nor the dominant process that can produce gravity anomalies or  topography on a planet's surface, and hence there are significant  challenges to using such observations in practice. 

### Gravity anomalies

If the Earth did not convect and if it was entirely fluid
over geological time, then it would have an ellipsoidal 
equilibrium figure, with the surface being an 
equipotential of the **gravity potential** (i.e., the sum
of the gravitational and centrifugal potentials). 
As we have seen, the lithosphere is sufficiently cool 
to behave elastically over geological time, with this layer
supporting both topography and lateral density contrasts that 
have been generated by a host of processes. Moreover, 
convection within the mantle is driven by density anomalies
whose gravitational signal can be felt at the surface, 

Modelling gravity anomalies  requires
solution of Poisson's equation for the potential, $\phi$, 
in a near spherical geometry. There is not time to 
enter into this topic deeply, and so we will summarise 
the  results so as to understand their practical implications. 
We write the density in the Earth as
```{math}
\rho(r,\theta,\varphi) = \rho^{(0)}(r) +
\rho^{(1)}(r,\theta,\varphi), 
```
where $(r,\theta,\varphi)$ are spherical polar co-ordinates, 
$\rho^{(0)}$ is the background density that is spherically symmetric, 
and $\rho^{(1)}$ is the aspherical perturbation. Similarly, 
we express topography on internal or external boundaries 
by writing the radius of the $i$-th boundary as
```{math}
r(\theta,\varphi) = a_{i} + h_{i}^{(1)}(\theta,\varphi). 
```
Finally, the resulting gravitational potential is written
```{math}
\phi(r,\theta,\varphi) = \phi^{(0)}(r) +
\phi^{(1)}(r,\theta,\varphi).
```
To solve for $\phi^{(1)}$ it is convenient to 
use spherical harmonic expansions, and hence we 
write
```{math}
\phi^{(1)}(r,\theta,\varphi) = 
\sum_{l=1}^{\infty}\sum_{m=-l}^{l}
\phi_{lm}(r) Y_{lm}(\theta,\varphi), 
```
with the $Y_{lm}$ spherical harmonic function of
degree $l$ and order $m$. It can be shown that the $(l,m)$-th expansion coefficient of the potential at the Earth's surface, $r = b$, is
equal to
```{math}
\phi_{lm}^{(1)}(b) = \frac{-4\pi G b}{2l+1}\left[
    \int_{0}^{b}\rho_{lm}(s)\left(\frac{s}{b}\right)^{l+2} \dd s
    - \sum_{i=1}^{n}[\rho^{(0)}(a_{i})]_{-}^{+} h_{i,lm}^{(1)} 
    \left(\frac{a_{i}}{b}\right)^{l+2}
\right], 
```
where $[\cdot]_{-}^{+}$ denotes the jump in a quantity on 
crossing a boundary in the positive $r$-direction.  
Here we see an integrated contribution from the density anomaly at the 
same degree and order, along with discrete contributions 
from the topography on each boundary. 

```{figure} figures/geoid.png
---
name: fig:02geoid
---
Variations in the gravitational potential at the Earth's 
surface expressed as the equivalent **geoid anomaly**. The 
latter quantity can be understood as the change in the position 
of the mean sea level associated with the gravitational potential 
perturbation. In further detail, if $\phi^{(1)}$ is the 
gravitational potential perturbation, then the geoid 
anomaly is defined as $-\phi^{(1)}/g$ with $g$ the 
average value of gravitational acceleration at the surface.
The observed geoid anomaly reflects contributions throughout
the whole Earth, but it is only at the longest wavelengths
that the effects of mantle convection are be seen.
```

To understand this result, we first recall 
that the degree, $l$, of a spherical harmonic can be viewed
as a non-dimensional wavenumber. Indeed, **Jean's relation**
shows that a spherical harmonic of degree $l$ on a sphere of
radius $a$ has the characteristic wavelength
```{math}
\lambda = \frac{2\pi a}{\sqrt{l(l+1)}}.
```
Looking now at the above expression for the $(l,m)$-th coefficient, 
we see that this is a weighted average of the density and topography 
coefficients at the same degree and otder, with the radial weighting function  proportional to 
```{math}
\left(\frac{r}{b}\right)^{l+2}. 
```
For fixed $l$, this is an increasing function of $r$, and 
so density anomalies or boundary topography near the surface 
have a relatively larger observable effect. Moreover, as the degree is
increased, the rate of increase of the weighting function 
with radius becomes much greater. It follows that observations of long-wavelength (e.g., of order $10^{3}\,\mathrm{km}$) gravity anomalies on the Earth can tell us about convection within the mantle. Indeed, 
such observations have been used to better determine 
the mantle's Rayleigh number and to place firmer bounds 
on viscosity variations with depth.

### Dynamic topography

Convection in the mantle applies a force at the base of the 
lithosphere. In areas of upgoing flow, the lithosphere, and hence 
the Earth's surface, is deflected upwards, and conversely in 
areas of downgoing flow. The resulting topography at the 
Earth's surface is known as **dynamic topography**, with 
this term being identical to that used within oceanography
for deflections of the sea surface linked to large-scale
ocean currents. Note that the deflection of the 
internal and external boundaries linked to mantle 
flow contributes directly to the associated gravity anomaly. 

The elastic lithosphere acts as a low-pass filter on the forces applied to its base.  As a result, dynamic topography is largest at long-wavelengths and is not appreciable at scales smaller than 
the lithospheric thickness. The amplitude of dynamic topography 
can be estimated using simple scaling arguments or through 
more sophisticated modelling. The result is that amplitudes of 
order 1 km might be expected at wavelenths of 1000 km.

```{figure} figures/dynamic_topography.png
---
name: fig:02dynamic_topography
---
Observations of dynamic topography for transect
along the margin of Western Africa. These observations
are obtained by correcting the observed topography for 
processes such as sedimentation. The amplitude 
of the dynamic topography is 1 km, and the horizontal 
wavelength is of order 1000 km.  Figure from Holdt *et al.* (2022).
```

Observations of dynamic topography can be made on the Earth, 
but the process is complicated by the need to remove other sources
of topography. This correction is significantly easier 
within the oceans, and as a result most observational models 
are limited to this region. 

## Further reading

- Turcotte, D.L. and Schubert, G., 2002. Geodynamics. Cambridge university press. 


## References

- Bhadeshia, H.K.D.H., 2003. Mechanisms and models for creep deformation and rupture.

- Holdt, M.C., White, N.J., Stephenson, S.N. and Conwayâ€Jones, B.W., 2022. Densely sampled global dynamic topographic observations and their significance. Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 127(7), p.e2022JB024391.

- Peltier, W.R., 2004. Global glacial isostasy and the surface of the ice-age Earth: the ICE-5G (VM2) model and GRACE. Annu. Rev. Earth Planet. Sci., 32(1), pp.111-149.

- Ricard, Y., 2007. Physics of mantle convection. Treatise on geophysics, 7, pp.31-87.

