(lecture_1)=
# Introduction to the core course

Course Director: **[Oliver Shorttle](mailto:shorttle@ast.cam.ac.uk)** ([IoA](https://ast.cam.ac.uk), [Department of Earth Sciences](https://esc.cam.ac.uk))

---

```{highlights}

**Learning objectives from the Core Course:**

- Gain a fluency in the key topics relevant to planetary science and life in the Universe from across disciplines.  In particular:
  - The key processes forming planets;
  - The important processes maintaining planetary habitability;
  - The astrochemistry and geochemistry that gave rise to life and might enable us to detect it on planets; and,
  - How life operates at scales from the chemical to the ecological to shape environments.
- The multitudinous factors, from the Universe's physical constants to whether a planet has a moon, that life's emergence may be contingent upon. 

**Learning objectives: Core course introduction**x

- The formulation of the Drake equation ([Drake, 1965](https://idiscover.lib.cam.ac.uk/permalink/f/t9gok8/44CAM_ALMA51671124270003606)).
- How parameters in the Drake equation have been and can be constrained, and the assumptions required to find these constraints.
- The limits of the Drake equation's use.

```

The core courses follow a narrative arc, from the formation of planets ([C1](../../01_planets/intro/intro.md)), through to the establishment of habitable environments ([C2](../../02_environments/intro/intro.md)), how the chemistry of water and atmospheres on planets might enable life to arise ([C3](../../03_detection/intro/intro.md)), and finally to life as an ecological and planetary scale phenomenon ([C4](../../04_biospheres/intro/intro.md)).  

We motivate some of the structure of the core course by here considering the Drake equation, that famous expression of how likely we are to find life in the Universe.

## The Drake equation

The Drake equation is:
```{math}
:label: eq:drake
N_c = R_* \cdot f_p \cdot n_e \cdot f_l \cdot f_i \cdot f_c \cdot L,
```
where $N_c$ is the \textemph{mean} number of communicative civilizations in the galaxy, $R_*$ is the \textemph{rate} of start formation, $f_p$ is the fraction of stars hosting planets, $n_e$ is the mean number of planets per start capable of supporting life, $f_l$ is the fraction of those potentially habitable planets on which life emerges, $f_i$ is the fraction of those inhabited planets where intelligence develops, $f_c$ is the fraction of 'intelligent' civilisations that develop communication, and $L$ is the mean communication timescale. 

Now, many legitimate criticisms have been levied against the Drake equation (e.g., [Alm\'ar, 2011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actaastro.2009.07.010); [Smith](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actaastro.2009.11.019), 2011).  However, it remains useful for at least two reasons.  First, as an example of how we might like to combine insights from across disciplines to address a common and fundamental question; in this case, the likelihood of receiving communications from other intelligent life in the galaxy.  Second, it focusses attention on what we need to know to better understand our chances of success in searching for life.  Both of these principles are at the heart of the PSLU course.

Importantly, the specific parameters the Drake equation includes are, unlike when Drake first wrote down the equation, now partially constrained by observation.  We therefore know better than ever before at least some of the relevant information to predict life's prevalence in the galaxy.

In this section we summarise some of what we know about the parameters of the Drake equation, as an introduction to material that will be covered in more detail later in the course.

### $R_*$


### $f_p$

### $n_e$

### $f_l$

### $f_i$

### $f_c$

### $L$

## How relevant is the Drake equation?
Given the previous sections, it is clear we are not in a position to fully evaluate the Drake equation and obtain a value of $N_c$, the mean number of communicative civilisations in the galaxy, without significant, and essentially completely unconstrained, assumptions.  However, we work with numbers like $N_c$ frequently as scientists, it is just the Drake equation asks too general question we cannot fully resolve.  For example, if instead we ask 'how large a volume of space (centred on Earth) do we need to survey to find 10 **{term}`hot Jupiter`s**?', then we are asking a question much like the Drake equation, but now one that is fully tractable given present information.  What is more, this question, and ones like it, are exactly the types of questions you would ask if you were proposing an observing campaign of hot Jupiters.

So, it is not that the type of question is wrong, just the amount of information required to answer it.  Even by removing some terms from the expression, it becomes more relevant to a general search for life in the Universe -- we might settle in the first instance for that life not being 'intelligent':
```{math}
:label: eq:drake2
N_l = R_* \cdot f_p \cdot n_e \cdot f_l \cdot L_s.
```
Here, we have dropped the most problematic terms from {eq}`eq:drake`: the propensity for life to become intelligent and communicative.  We are then left with an expression evaluating to give $N_l$, the number of life-hosting planets in the galaxy, and instead asking that we now know $L_s$, the mean longevity of life on a planet.  

The term close to being a complete unknown in this expression is $f_l$, [as before](#f-l).  However, now the final term has become something that we might venture more of an opinion on than the mean communicative timescale, $L$.  Life on Earth has shown remarkable resilience since its emergence > 3.5 Ga, surviving near global glaciations, major asteroid impacts, and numerous large outpourings of magma.  Over this period, life has also been hugely diverse, evolving from single cell, to multicellular, to the macrobiota that covers most of Earth's continents today.  All these types of life have proven resilient to large perturbations of their environments, even as species have gone extinct.  

Life on Earth suggests that once established, provided the planetary climate remains within habitable bounds somewhere on its surface, life will survive in that refugia, radiating outwards when conditions allow.  

How would you re-write the Drake equation and evaluate it for the search for life in the Universe?  